# Watch turtles ‘dance’ when a magnetic field signals a meal

*By Frances Vinall*

*Published: 2025-02-12*

![Article Image](https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-apps/imrs.php?src=https://d1i4t8bqe7zgj6.cloudfront.net/02-12-2025/t_9bc85bf333404f078852254febc003f2_name_turtle_1.png&w=1440)

Scientists have discovered a new reason for turtles to dance for joy: Loggerhead
sea turtles seem able to discern and remember magnetic field signatures, which
could help them find food. The Earth’s magnetic field is detected by species
across the animal kingdom — there are even suggestions that some humans
unknowingly sense it — using an ability scientists call magnetoreception. But
how animals are able to do this, and how different species use the magnetic
field, remain open questions under investigation.

Now, in a study published Wednesday in the journal Nature, researchers from the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill report that when turtles are placed
inside a magnetic field they have been trained to associate with food, they
“dance” in response.

“Sea turtles are renowned for their long-distance migrations and extraordinary
navigational abilities,” wrote the authors, who include researchers from the
university’s Lohmann Lab, which specializes in studying animal navigation and
sensory biology.

Advertisement

Baby sea turtles seem to respond to information present in the magnetic field
from the very beginning of their lives, they added.

The researchers studied turtles in two laboratory environments with different
magnetic signatures, feeding them in one and not in the other. When the
loggerheads were placed in an environment up to four months later with the same
magnetic signature as the one that they had learned to associate with meals,
scientists reported, they were much more likely to do the “turtle dance,”
indicating that they expected to be fed.

They would tilt, open their mouths, flap their front flippers and spin in place
in the water.

“The results provide strong evidence that loggerhead turtles can learn the
magnetic signatures of specific geographical areas,” the authors wrote. “Such an
ability has, to our knowledge, never before been demonstrated in any animal.”

Advertisement

Earth’s magnetic field is generated by the spinning ball of molten iron at the
planet’s center. It performs a variety of important functions, including acting
as a shield against solar winds.

Several migratory species, including birds and sharks, are believed to use a
compass-like sense to navigate with its help. While scientists are still
researching how it affects animals’ behaviors, it influences everything from how
migratory birds find their destination to the fact that dogs usually defecate
while standing along a north-south axis.

While sea turtles may have this compass capacity as well, the sensory ability
loggerheads demonstrated in the lab was distinct, the researchers said. The
memorized signatures appear to help these turtles form a “map” of the magnetic
field.

Chemist and biophysicist Jonathan Woodward, a professor of the Graduate School
of Arts and Sciences at the University of Tokyo who was not involved in the
Nature study, said in an email that it was an “important study” that
demonstrates how “turtles specifically use both the intensity and the
inclination of the geomagnetic field to identify target locations and store and
reuse this information over long periods of time.”

Woodward, who studies the molecular basis of magnetoreception, added that there
has been a long-standing debate over how animals might use the magnetic field to
traverse the ocean, land and skies and map them.
